User Experience - Word Track
To help aid your own study material, here is the word track for the whole User Experience section of the course.

Section 10: Overview:

In this section, I'm going to cover exactly what user experience is, and show you how you can improve the user experience on your website. I'm also going to get into the user metrics, which can be affected by a poor user experience such as organic CTR, dwell time, and bounce rate. So without further ado, let's dive into this section.

Section 10: What Is User Experience (UX) And How Can We Improve It:

What is user experience? User experience, also known as UX, is the process design teams use to create products and layouts that provide meaningful and relevant experience to users. It's basically about providing a user with the information they want to see, with the least amount of friction. By friction I mean anything that can get in the way such as big advertisements, pop up email captures and so on and so on. Websites with a poor UX struggle to rank highly in search results, due to the site's poor user metrics dragging it down. There's six main things you need to be aware of that can cause a poor user experience. The first is, responsive web design. There are many reasons for businesses and web developers to use responsive web design principles. Content creators have an obligation to meet consumers where they are. An increasing number of users are regularly accessing the internet on a wide range of mobile devices, often more frequently than people using traditional desktop computers.

Responsive web design ensures that your content is placed correctly for all users, regardless of what device they are using. Which provides a stronger user experience and ultimately more conversions. As you can see from the image, the website on the left does not have a responsive web design. As a result, if you land on that website and you want to read the content, you're going to have to zoom in and literally scroll across the screen to read it, which isn't exactly a great experience. Whereas in the example on the right, the website does have a responsive web design, and as a result the article is much easier to read. Ensuring your website design is responsive is probably one of the most important things to check when it comes to user experience. Most themes and website builders already have responsive designs, so most people won't have to worry about this. However, if your site has been around for many years, then it is worth checking.

Number two, simple navigation. Keep your website's navigation simple. Your navigation is the menu you have at the top of your website. Without website navigation, your visitors can't figure out how to find your blog, your products, your pricing, contact information, and so on and so on. Start with this rule of thumb. Your website navigation structure should allow someone to land on any page on your website within three clicks. It would be great if you knew that every visitor would start on your homepage and then follow a predictable path. However, in reality that never happens. People navigate around your website through all different places. Website navigation allows visitors to flow from one page to another, without frustration. If you've done your job well, visitors will leave the site with intent on returning, and might even buy something from you in the future.

What you need to remember is that people visit lots of websites every single day, so they have no shortage of places to find the information they want. If you don't offer a clear website navigation, users will get frustrated trying to find what they want, and they will simply close your website and go elsewhere. Number three, answer search queries as soon as possible. I see a lot of websites which are guilty of this. Instead of giving the user what they want, which is what they search for, they show the user tons of other information, and then push the answer, slash what the person was looking for, towards the bottom of the page. Resulting in the user having to scroll all the way down the page, just to find what they were looking for. This results in a poor user experience, and a lot of the time the user just get bored. End up hitting the back button, go into Google, and try to find another website.

Number four, include rich media. Rich media simply refers to images and videos. You want to add lots of images and videos on your website where relevant to help break up big walls of texts. Rich media also makes your content more visually engaging. No one wants to land on a website confronted by a massive wall of text. You can use websites such as Pixabay to find tons of relative free images that you can use on your website. Number five, have a fast loading website. I spoke about this in quite some depth in the speeding up your WordPress website section of the course. I also showed you what steps you can take to speed up your website as well. It's super important your website loads fast. Imagine you urgently need to find some information, so you head over to Google and enter your question.

You then click the top result in Google, only for it to take 20 seconds to load. Chances are you won't be happy, and you're going to hit the back button on your browser to find another website. Having a fast loading website is essential in this day and age. You want to make sure your website loads within three seconds, as this is the number that Google has stated. You can test your website's page speed using GT metrics, which is a free tool actually showcased earlier in the technical SEO section of the course. And lastly, number six, match up with search intent. Search intent is super, super important, and it's also something I covered earlier on in the course in the keyword research section. When you optimize a page for a specific keyword, you need to make sure your page matches the search intent of that keyword. If someone searches for green hats in Google, then they should land on a page which is all about green hats.

However, if someone searches for red hats, then they should land on a page which is just about red hats. Both searches should return results for what they search for. You shouldn't be shown any red hats on a page which ranked for the keyword, green hats. Match your page with a search intent, and you'll see your website conversions skyrocket. So now we've covered the six elements, which can help improve your website's UX. In the next video, I will run you through free user metrics, which can be affected if these six elements aren't implemented on your website. I'll see you there.

Section 10: User Metrics That Can Affect Your Rankings - Organic CTR - Part 1:

The user metrics can drag your website rankings down. The first metric is Organic CTR. So organic click-through rate, also known as Organic CTR, is a percentage of searches that click on a search engine result. Organic CTR is largely based on ranking position, but it's also influenced by a website title, description, and a URL. CTR is often an overlooked metric when it comes to SEO, as everyone seems to focus on rankings just these days. If you have a better CTR than a website above you, then it's a strong signal to Google that users think that your website is a better fit for the search query. As a result, you may get a ranking boost, and CSL outranks that exact website, I won't go through with the details of how to create a title tag in this video, as I've already covered that in quite some depth in the on-page SEO section of the course. But I will head over to my browser and show you the averages and what you should be achieving, in terms of a good click-through rate.

So I'm now over on Google, and I simply typed in organic click-through rate, and as you can see we've got this website in position two. It might be in position one when you did a search, maybe position three, but essentially the website you want to be looking at is going to be advancedwebranking.com. Let's give this a click. This website will give you the freshest CTR averages, as you can see, and it's pulling monthly from millions of different keywords. If we scroll down to the bottom, you can actually see this chart shows the organic click-through rate from searches coming for 1,953,585 different keywords across 32,000 different websites. So, tons and tons of data you're looking at.

So if we scroll up and then un-tick mobile, and look at the CTR ranges for desktop, we can see that an average website in position one on Google gets a CCR of roughly 31%. Do bear in mind, what I'm looking at right now is the websites currently in the US. We change that to the UK, because the CTR is slightly a little bit different. It's currently at 35%, which essentially means people in the UK are more likely to fit the website in position one, than people based in the US. Typically, when I review this data, I like to leave it on internationally, just to make sure I get quite a wide range of data to look at.

So as you can see, again, the average data for position one is a CTR of 33%. So, all that means is, if there were 100 people typing in a keyword month, that would have a total search, one of 100 searches per month, and not only the 100 searches, the websites in position one would get 33% of those clicks, which should be 33 people. The website in position one gets 16% of those clicks, which would be 16 people. The website in position three would get 9.67, and as you can see, the further you are on Google, the less clicks you get.

So as you can tell, where you rank on Google is extremely important. So most people say, "Hey, I'm already on page one, you can't really help me." However, as you can see, the website on page one would be here 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 3, 2, 1, and there's obviously 10 results per page on Google. So literally, every number you see here, 1 to 10 would be on page one. However, the bottom of page one, position 10, gets a CTR of 1.37%, whereas a website in position one, gets a 33%. so a massive, massive difference.

So if you are planning on starting your own SEO agency for example, then you can still help the websites lower on page one, such as position five, six, seven, eight on onwards. They can still benefit a lot from going just two positions higher up in Google. It's good to note as well, that the data I'm looking at is currently the exact figures. You can take the averages, and also you can obviously filter through the toggles at the bottom as well, and look at desktop, and then look at mobile, or look at both desktop and mobile. And you can click the dropdown menu at the top, and at the data for different ranges of different months. So for example, I can look at the data for July, 2018 and just look at the CTR and see how different it was. And by the looks of it, it was a little bit higher in 41%, which is quite high, to be fair.

But essentially, this is the overview of Advanced Web Ranking. It's a really good tool. So do use this to get some good averages on what CTO you're currently getting for your website. And like I said, if you do want to improve your CTR, do have a look at the video I put together in the on-page SEO section of this course, as I actually go through the whole process of how you can craft the perfect title tag and get all of your keywords in there.

Section 10: User Metrics That Can Affect Your Rankings - Dwell Time - Part 2:

Another metric that can affect your website's ranking is dwell time. Dwell time is the amount of time a Google searcher spends on a page before returning back to the Google search results. For example, let's say you search for grain-free cookies in Google. The first result might look like a good fit, so you go ahead and click it. But then when you get there, the site is ugly and hard to use. And the content isn't helpful at all. So after five seconds, you click back to the search results. That would mean your dwell time was five seconds. And that super brief visit tells Google that you weren't happy with that result.

So let's imagine you'd go back to Google and you click on the second search result. However this time, the content is amazing and the site is easy to navigate around. So as a result, you spend a solid five minutes on this website. And then you click back to the search results. That long dwell time tells Google that you got a lot of value from that result. And if lots of other people are also doing the same thing on that page, think Google will boost the rankings of that page.

So how can you improve your dwell time? The first thing you can do is draw people in. The first thing to consider when looking at improving dwell time is how appealing your page is to the user from the offset. Does it entice people to read on? If not, you want to look at restructuring your opening sentences to hook the reader and increase the chances of them reading on.

Number two, digestible content. That means using shorter sentences, writing in shorter, less complex paragraphs, using content chunking techniques such as headings and lists, and making sure your content is skimmable. Remember, people don't read a webpage as they would read a book. They're far more likely to skim through your content and find the bit which interests then the most. By focusing on creating digestible content, you can make your content easier to read and therefore more appealing, leading into an increased dwell time.

Number three, creating content worthy of sticking around. That means understanding your audience and doing keyword research to ensure you're covering the topic people really, really care about. That also means writing content that is long enough to justify longer dwell times. For example, a 200 word blog post isn't going to take someone five minutes to read. And obviously, people won't stick around for content that doesn't warrant their time.

Lastly, use internal linking to keep people on your website. Once people have read your page, you should give them somewhere to go to next. Since dwell time is measured on the time between someone coming on your site and returning back to Google. It makes sense that you should try to keep users on your site once they finish reading the page there. Internal links are a great way to do this.

Section 10: User Metrics That Can Affect Your Rankings - Bounce Rate - Part 3:

Bounce rate is another user metric, which can affect your website's rankings. Dwell time and bounce rate are similar, but they're not the same thing. Bounce rate is defined as a percentage of visitors that leave a webpage without taking any action, such as clicking on a link, filling out a form or making a purchase. It doesn't matter if that person has been on your website for two seconds or two hours. If the user clicks back to the search results it counts as a bounce.

So why is bounce rate important? Bounce rate is important for two main reasons. The first, someone that bounces from your site obviously didn't convert. So when you stop a visitor from bouncing, you can also increase your website conversion rate. Number two, a bounce rate lets you know that your site or specific pages on your site has issues with content, user experience, page layout or copywriting.

So now you know that, you're probably wondering, "What's the average bounce rate?" According to a report on GoRocketFuel, the average balance rate is between 41-50%. However, it's good to note that the bounce rate will vary drastically across multiple industries. For example, eCommerce websites typically have a 20-45% bounce rate, where a blog can have anywhere from 65-90%. So if you're looking to figure out what a good bounce rate is, make sure you're comparing your bounce rate to other sites in your industry. Also, it's good to note that your traffic sources can dramatically impact your site's bounce rate too. Someone landing on your website through one of your email marketing campaigns, as in someone who signed up for your email list, would have a lower bounce rate than someone who clicked on an ad and then landed on your website.

How to improve your website's bounce rate. So now we know what sort of bounce rate we're aiming for, and we've also established the common causes of a high bounce rate. Let's look at some ways we can reduce bounce rate and increase engagement with your website. The easier visitors find it to use your site the fewer of them will react with horror and belt. Improving your website's usability should be a never-ending process of testing, monitoring stats and talking to customers. But in the interest of giving you something to take away and apply immediately, let's look at four common bounce reducing usability tricks.

First, embed YouTube videos on your page. Videos are a great way to hook people in and get them engaged with your page and stay on it for longer. Number two, have a fast loading website. A Google analysis of 11 million landing pages found that slow loading speed correlated with higher bounce rates. You can see this stat on the URL at the bottom. This shouldn't come as a surprise, after all, people online are super, super impatient. Number three, make your content super easy to read. Or as I like to say, hard to read equals won't read. So if your content looks like a big wall of text then your balance rate is going to be through the roof. And lastly, number four satisfies search intent. As discussed earlier, your page should really give users exactly what they're searching for. If you don't, they're just going to end up bouncing around and finding another website.

Resources for this lecture
