Keyword Research - Word Track
To help aid your own study material, here is the word track for the whole Keyword Research section of the course.

Section 4: Overview:

In this section, I'm going to cover what is a keyword and understand the intent behind it. I'm going to explain the difference between short tail and long-tail keywords. I'm going to show you how you can find out what keywords you already rank for in Google. I'm going to show you how you can determine the keyword difficulty, and just how difficult it is to rank for a certain keyword, and I'm going to show you how you can find additional keywords to target for your website too. On top of that, I'm going to show you how you can find all the keywords that your competitors rank for. I'm going to show you how you can use Google Auto-Suggest to come up with tons of keyword ideas, and really importantly, I'm going to cover the importance of keeping your keywords organized. And lastly, I'm going to show you how you can validate your keywords using Google Trends. So without further ado, let's dive into this section.

Section 4: What Is A Keyword + Understanding The Intent Behind It:

What is a keyword? A keyword is simply a search phrase. For example, if you went over to Google and typed in vanilla ice cream, the keyword would be vanilla ice cream, the entire search phrase, not the individual words, so not vanilla or ice cream. The keyword would be vanilla ice cream. To be successful in SEO, you need to figure out what your potential customers would search for in Google to find your website and the service or product you offer. If we go back to my previous example of yoga mats, let's just imagine you have a website that sells yoga mats. One of the main keywords you would target would be yoga mats as that's the main thing you offer on your website. Once you know what keywords you want to target, you can then optimize your website to increase your online visibility for those keyword searches.

Understanding keyword intent. Keyword intent, sometimes known as search intent, represents a user's purpose for the search. For example, if someone goes into Google and types in, "Are yoga mats worth the money?" Then from the keyword, we can tell straight away that this person isn't actually sure whether they need a yoga mat or not as the search phrase says, "Are yoga mats worth the money?" So from this keyword intent, we get two things. One, the person knows about yoga mats, and two, they're not sure whether they need a yoga mat. Even if that another keyword such as buy a red yoga mat, we can tell from this keyword that search intent is a lot more different. The person that's typed in buys a red yoga mat which means they already know that they need a yoga mat and they've gone even further and they actually described the yoga mat they need, which is a red one.

So if you have a website and sell red yoga mats and someone types in to buy a red yoga mat, then they land on your page showing red yoga mats, the person is most likely going to buy one if the price is right. However, if someone types in, "Are yoga mats worth the money?" then they land on the same page showing red yoga mats, the person probably isn't going to buy. The person still needs convincing. Understanding the difference in search intent will make a massive impact on your SEO campaign. Essentially, when you understand the buyer intent, you can make sure the page a person lands on is relevant to what they typed in and will result in more sales and a much better user experience.

Section 4: Short tail vs long-tail keywords:

Short tail keywords are much more general search queries that consist of one or two words while long-tail keywords on the other hand consist of three to five or even more words. Here's an example of a short tail keyword following a pseudo example earlier on in the course, yoga mat. Here's an example of a long-tail keyword, best non-slip yoga mat. As you can see, the short tail keyword is a lot broader and can cover a lot more things. The long-tail keyword is more targeted and more narrowed down which as a result it means a long tail keyword converts much better than short-tail keywords.

If someone goes onto Google and types in a yoga mat, we actually have no idea what the person is looking for. Are they looking for a red yoga mat, are they looking for a yoga mat to buy, are they trying to find out how much yoga mats cost, for example. However, on the other hand, the long tail keyword, best non-slip yoga mat, we have no doubt whatsoever what this person wants. They want a non-slip yoga mat. They haven't specified the color, so that isn't an issue. However, what we do know is they want the best non-slip yoga mat. If this person types that into Google and then lands on a page on our website, which is all about non-slip yoga mats, this would be the perfect thing for the user and for us as well.

And just a pro-tip as well, long-tail keywords are much easier to rank for in Google as they have less competition than short-tail keywords. Do bear in mind, if you do own a yoga website, you should be targeting yoga mats in general anyway. However, that shouldn't be the main effort of your whole SEO campaign as you're going to find yourself getting a little bit stuck on page two, maybe page three, and there's going to be a lot of competition and a lot of websites also competing for the broad search term of yoga mat.

Section 4: A Free Alternative You Can Use For Keyword Research:

I've received quite a few messages from students saying that SEMrush is really good. However, can I provide a free alternative? Yes, I can. There's actually another tool you can use to find keyword ideas for your website. It's actually a tool built within Google Ads.

To access this tool, you do need to sign up for a Google Ads account, which is completely free as well. Once you sign up for a Google Ads account, what you need to do is click Tools and Settings at the top, and then go over to the column where it says Planning and click the Keyword Planner option. This is going to give you two different options. Option one is to Discover new keywords and option two is to Get search volume and forecast.

We want to use option one, Discover new keywords. Let's give this a click. This is now going to open a page that looks like this. On this page, we have two options. We can simply start by entering a keyword, or we can start by entering a website URL. I'm going to cover both elements in this video.

Let's start with the first one, start with a keyword. On this line, I'm going to type in a keyword that is relevant to our business. Let's just type in the keyword yoga mat, and then simply click Get Results. This is now going to show us all the keyword ideas, which are all relevant to the keyword yoga mat. As you can see, we have the top keyword we entered right here, yoga mat. Then we have the best yoga mat, manduka yoga mat. We have a Jade yoga mat, yoga bag, cork yoga mat, travel yoga mat, and so on and so on.

So you can actually see it's actually 1,842 different keyword ideas. That is loads and loads of keyword ideas for you to sift through and see which ones are a good fit for your website. Do bear in mind, the data we are viewing now is on Google Ads. However, as we have nothing to do with Google Ads, the best thing to do is actually download all the keyword ideas. Export them all, and then go through the list and see which ones are relevant to your website and then add that to your main master sheet templates.

It's really important to note as well, that we do have a column right here, which says Competition. However, we need to completely ignore this column as this competition has nothing to do with SEO. This is competition for running ads for these keywords. The only column you really need to pay attention to is going to be the first column which is all to do with keyword ideas.

So if we go back one step now and go for the second option, under Discover new keywords, we go with, Start with a website. We can actually go over to Google and simply plug in one of our keywords, such as yoga mats, scroll down and find the website in position one in organic, which is Yogamatters. We can simply copy the link address, go back to Google Keyword Planner, plug in the URL, and then ensure we have the bottom option selected, which is this one right here, Use only this page, and then simply click Get Results. This is going to show us all the keywords which are relevant to the URL we just plugged in. As you can see, we now have 775 new keyword ideas, such as the best yoga mat. We have yoga towels, yoga mat bags, yoga accessories, yoga equipment, and so on and so on.

This is a really good way to find tons of keywords that the websites on page one already appear for themselves. You can actually rinse and repeat this for any other website you see on page one. We've done it for Yogamatters. We can do Amazon. We can do Argos, Decathlon. Plug all of those websites into Google Ads and literally see all of the keywords. It would be the same process once you've done that, plug into URL, download all of the keywords, sift through the data and add the ones which are relevant to your main master template.

As you can see, Google Keyword Planner is extremely powerful and allows you to find tons of keywords.

Section 4: How To Find Out What Keywords Your Website Already Appears For:

When it comes to keyword research, one of the best places to start is to find out what keywords your website already appears for in Google. The beauty of this is these are keywords that Google already deemed relevant to your website so all we need to do is find out what these keywords are and then further optimize our website a little bit better for these specific keywords. Once you do this, you can expect to see your website jump up higher in Google. We've had client sites jump from page nine, all the way up to page one, just by optimizing their site for keywords that they didn't even know they appeared for in the first place. To do this, you're going to need access to SEO software called a SEMrush.

Once you have access to SEMrush, what you want to do is insert your website URL in the main search bar you see at the top. For the purpose of this training video, I'm going to be using yogamatters.com. To confirm, this is just a website I found on Google by typing in a yoga mat, they were simply on page one. I do not own this website, I have no affiliation with this website whatsoever, I'm just simply using it for the purpose of this training course. Let's go ahead and get Yoga Matters' URL, go over to SEMrush, paste in the URL and then click search and what this is going to do is it's going to show us all of the keywords that this website appears for. Once that's loaded, you can see we've got quite a bit of information in front of us. Do not be overwhelmed as I'm going to go through all of these sections later on in the course.

But what we want to do for the purpose of this video is scroll down to where it says organic research and then under organic research, you can see it says top organic keywords. These are all the keywords that this website appears for in Google. As you can see, there is 9,277 different keywords that this website ranks for in Google. Now that is a lot of keyword ideas. As you can see already, this tool is extremely powerful and will literally let you know all the keywords you appear for in just a few seconds.

To take a look at all of these keywords, what we need to do is click view details right here and then this is going to open a page where we can see tons of information about these keywords, such as the actual keyword. We can see the position this website is in Google for this keyword. We can also look at the volume. The volume is the amount of times this keyword gets searched for every single month in Google. We can also see the URL which ranks in Google for this particular keyword as well. This is all very handy to know.

If we scroll down the page, we can have a look at all of the keywords. You can see, we have tons of keyword ideas, such as best yoga books for beginners. We're currently in position one for that keyword. We've got what is hot yoga? We have yoga poses for kids currently in position 14 and this is the URL that appears for that keyword. As you can see, you can really go through the data and start to see which keywords you're not on page one for and then further optimize your site a little bit better to ensure you get onto page one for those keywords. A little trick you can do is you can go to the top of this page and actually go over to here where it says positions and then you can tell SEMrush to only show you the keywords that you're in position between 11 and 24, as these are all the keywords that you're going to be on page two for. And as you can see, we're currently on page two for over 1,000 different keywords, 1,025 to be precise.

Instead of reviewing all these keywords in SEMrush, what you can actually do is click the export button, download all of this either Excel or a CSV file and then review the information way more easily. Let's go-ahead for a CSV file and once downloaded, is going to look something like this. It's quite a lot of information to take in, but don't worry about it as we don't need a lot of the columns you're seeing at present. All we need to know is a keyword and the position we are in Google for that keyword, along with the search volume and the URL, which appears in Google.

Let's go ahead and delete all these other columns as we don't actually need these columns. We don't need the CPC, so that can go, keyword difficulty, let's get rid of that. I haven't found the SEMrush keyword difficulty to actually be that accurate so don't worry about that as I'm going to show you in a separate video, how we can determine keyword difficulty. Let's also get rid of the previous position, that's not that important. And then let's go ahead and bold these top columns and then just expand them so we can see all the information.

As you can see, we can now see all of the keywords our website appears for on page two, what position we are in exactly for those keywords, the number of times all those keywords get searched for every single month in Google and the URL, which is appearing in Google for that specific keyword. Now it's good to note that all the keywords we're looking at right now are all the keywords across our whole domain. If we wanted to find out what keywords specific URL ranks for in Google, then what we need to do is take a specific URL and then search for that within SEMrush.

Let's go ahead and go over to mats and bags and let's simply go for the yoga mat towel bag, for an example. Let's take this URL and then let's go over to SEMrush and insert that URL and then click search. And as you can see, this URL appears for one keyword in Google. Now, the reason why we're seeing one keyword and not any more than one keyword is that we still have our filter applied. What I'm going to do is go up here and click the clear filter and now this is going to show us all the keywords that this URL appears for. In total, this URL appears for five different keywords and as you can imagine, they are all to do with yoga mats as that is what the URL is about. This is how you'd find out what keywords specific URL ranks for in Google.

In this video, we used SEMrush to carry out the keyword research, which obviously has a seven-day free trial. However, after those seven days, if you're running on a tight budget and would like to use a free application for keyword research, then you'll be pleased to know that I made a separate video that shows you how to carry out keyword research using a completely free tool. This free tool is not as powerful as SEMrush as it's obviously free. However, it still gives you plenty and plenty of keyword ideas you can use and it's a great tool for those who don't have much capital or are potentially just starting out. This separate video I'm referring to is the one coming up next.

Section 4: How To Determine Keyword Difficulty:

So now we know what keywords our website appears on the second and third page of Google, it's time to work out how difficult it will be to get our website onto page one for those specific keywords. This process is called keyword difficulty analysis, which is essentially where we figure out just how difficult it's going to be to rank for a specific keyword. To work out the keyword difficulty, we're going to use a free Google Chrome extension called MozBar.

To find their extension, all you need to do is go over to Google and search for MozBar Chrome extension. It should be the top result. Once you give it a click, you should see a page that looks similar to this, which is offered by Moz and obviously the Chrome extension is called MozBar, which is one word. So once you found the extension, you need to go ahead and add that to your Google Chrome.

Now it's important to note as well, that you do need to sign up for a Moz account to use its extension, but it is completely free to sign up. And for those who don't already know, Moz is actually another SEO software company, pretty similar to SEMrush. Although I found the information and the data that SEMrush provides to be far more accurate. However, I'm a big fan of the algorithm Moz uses to determine keyword difficulty, so this is what I primarily use Moz for.

So once you have the MozBar Chrome extension added to your browser, all you need to do is go over to Google and simply carry out a search for a keyword that you would like to target. So in this instance, I'm going to be using the keyword yoga mat. Now, once Google has returned the results, I want to go over to my MozBar Chrome extension and simply give it a click until it turns blue, like so.

Now what this is going to do, it's going to overlay two metrics to the organic results. It's really important to note that it will only add metrics to the organic results and not the paid ads. As obviously what we're looking at now is all to do with SEO, which appears in the organic section. So as you can see, it's pulled in two metrics. The first is what we call PA. And the second is what we call DA. PA stands for page authority and DA stands for domain authority. So page authority essentially tells you how authoritative and how powerful this specific page is, the one ranking in Google. And domain authority tells you how powerful and just how authoritative the overall website is on a whole.

So when it comes to keyword difficulty analysis, what I like to do is look for websites that are on page one that has either a page authority or a domain authority of below 25. And the reason why I say the figure of 25 is because 25 isn't actually that hard to reach, especially if you carry out a really comprehensive SEO campaign, like the one I'm going to teach you in this course. And just to give you some context, our actual agency website, clickslice.co.uk, we actually have a page authority of 31 and a domain authority of 25. So these numbers aren't that hard to achieve at all. And all the SEO I'm going to teach you in this course is the same SEO that I've been doing on my own agency website.

So if we analyze the websites we have on page one for our keyword yoga mat, you can see we've got a page authority of 35 for the website in position one, we've got a domain authority of 50. And just to clarify it, both of these metrics, page authority and domain authority, are actually calculated out of 100. So the higher these numbers are the more difficult it is to outrank these websites and these websites are going to be really, really authoritative.

So in position two, we have argos.co.uk, which has a massive domain authority of 89 and a page authority of 49. So again, from the first few websites we see, it's not really a good sign. If we scroll down, we have Amazon, domain authority, 94; domain authority, 69 for Decathlon; Women's Health Mag, domain authority, 88. So again, tons of more massive websites. We've got really high page authorities as well, 51, 48, and we have a 39. If we keep on scrolling down to the bottom of page one, you can see it's pretty much the same thing. We've got another massive domain authority of 77. We've got another domain authority of 94. Again, really high page authorities as well. So as you've probably already figured out, ranking on page one for this keyword, yoga mat is going to be really difficult and it's going to require a lot of resources.

So let's look at another keyword now. So we're going to use this keyword example, non-slip yoga towel UK. So if we scroll down to the organic results and have a look at the two metrics, you can see that the website in position one is Amazon again. They have a page authority of 48 and domain authority of 94. So again, a really big website. However, if we keep scrolling down, you can see, we have a lot less competitive websites on page one for this keyword. We've got yogabliss.co.uk, which is in position two. Yoga Bliss has a page authority of 28 and a domain authority of 31. So both the numbers are where we want to be.

This is a really good sign to see when you're doing SEO, as it gives you a strong indication that if this website can get onto page one and rank above all these other websites below it, which has really high domain authorities, then it just goes to show that if you carry out a really good SEO campaign, then you can also rank above these websites too. And what's even more reassuring is if you scroll down even further, you can see we have a few more weak websites on page one as well. We have buy-new.co.uk, page authority of 18, domain authority, 18 as well. So again, another really good sign that we can also rank on page one for this keyword. If we keep on scrolling down to see what else we have, we have another website at the bottom of page one, page authority, 19, and domain authority, 24.

So essentially when it comes to analyzing the competition, all we're trying to do is find websites on page one that has either a page authority or a domain authority of below 25. As long as you see that, then it's a thumbs up. And I recommend you go ahead and target that keyword. Now do bear in mind if you are more experienced and you know quite a bit about SEO, maybe you've been doing it for a few years and you just feel more confident, then feel free to go for more difficult keywords. Just bear in mind as those keywords are more difficult by nature it's going to take you longer to rank on page one, and you're going to require more resources.

Section 4: How To Find Additional Keywords For Your Website:

In this video, I'm going to show you how you can find additional keywords to target for your website. To do this, you're going to need access to SEMRush, which is an SEO software I covered in the previous video titled How To Find Out What Keywords Your Website Appears For.

SEMRush is a paid tool. However, you can get access to the software for free by utilizing the free seven day trial that they provide for new users. This software is super powerful and will allow you to figure out everything you need to know to rank on the first page of Google. SEO is complex and the more data we have, the better decisions we'll be able to make.

SEMRush provides you with tons of data, making it more likely that you will succeed when doing SEO. To confirm, the seven day trial that they give you is more than enough time to action everything you're going to learn in this course.

Once you have access, what you want to do is go over to the top of SEMRush and go to this search bar and simply search for one of your keywords. Now, as we are trying to find additional keyword ideas, what you want to do is search for a short tail keyword, and that way the software will return the maximum amount of keyword ideas.

Let's follow suit by using Yoga Matters as an example website for the purpose of this training course. If we go onto Yoga Matters, we can see they have tons of different equipment up for sale. They have mats and bags. They have equipment and accessories. For the purpose of this training video, I'm going to go for the keyword yoga mats. I'm not going to go for a travel yoga mat or yoga mat towels. I'm going to keep it as broad as possible. I'm going to select yoga mats.

Let me go over to SEMRush and simply search for yoga mat. As you can see, once the page is loaded, SEMRush has returned tons of keyword data, all to do with yoga mats. At the top of the screen, and we have the total monthly search volume for what we searched for, so yoga mats. What this means is that yoga mat gets searched for 165,000 times every single month in Google. This is applicable to the United States.

Now, if you're not based in the US or you're simply targeting another country other than the US, then what you can actually do is go over to the database option, which is right here, and then simply select another country. What that's going to do is it's going to show you the total monthly search volume for that keyword in a specific country you selected. However, for the purpose of this training video, I'm going to go back and simply leave it as the United States.

If you scroll down the page to where it says keyword variations, which is typically the second box at the top of the screen, this is actually where SEMRush showed you all the keyword ideas which it's found. In total, they found over 32,000 different keyword ideas, which just shows you how powerful the software is. We have a yoga mat which gets searched for again 165,000 times every single month. We've got the best yoga mat, Lulu Lemon yoga mat, Jade yoga mat, and so on, and so on. If you want into view all those 32,000 keywords, what you need to do is simply give that number a click, or you can simply click the box below where it says view all 32,375 keywords.

Let's go ahead and do that now.

Just like that, we can now see all of those 32,000 keyword ideas which SEMRush has returned. It's literally taken us a few seconds and we've got over 32,000 keyword ideas that we can use to optimize our website around. We've got good yoga mats. We've got yoga mat brands. Yoga mat holder. Yoga mat flip-flops, which is quite interesting. We've got yoga mat storage and so on, and so on.

Now to the right of these keywords, you're going to see multiple columns. We have volume, we've got trends, we've got KD, which stands for keyword difficulty. If you remember what I said in the previous video, we actually do not use SEMRush's KD, as I don't actually find it to be that accurate. However, it's just another column that they show on this page. We've got the CPC, which is essentially the cost per click. If you were to run a Google ad for this keyword, then that is roughly how much you would pay every time someone clicks your ad. We've got the competitive density, which again, I don't really use that. Then lastly, we have the SERP results. So again, we don't really use any of these other columns other than the keyword and the volume, as all we're doing in this process is just to generate more additional keyword ideas.

So what you can also do once you're on this page is add advanced filters. So you can say to SEMRush only show me the keywords that have at least a monthly search volume of 100 and above. The way you do that is you just go up here to where it says advanced filters, and then where it says volume, you want to simply put in 100 as the minimum, and then click apply filters. What this is going to do is simply remove all the keywords that don't have at least 100 searches every single month. So as you can see, our keywords have now gone down from 32,000 and it's dropped to just 492.

This is going to make this data way more manageable for us to actually manage when we go over to Excel. And we'll just get rid of all the keywords which actually don't have that much search behind them. And to be fair, those are keywords which aren't going to generate that much traffic anyway.

So what we used to do back in the day was simply go to the right-hand side of the screen, click export, and then download all of these keywords, so all 492 of them. We'd add them to our keyword research template. So this is the template file that we use at the agency. I am going to upload it as a downloadable resource to this video, so don't worry about that. Then essentially we'd add all the keywords right here on our master tab. Then we simply go through all of the keywords and then try to categorize similar keywords together.

So what do I mean by similar keywords? I mean keywords which basically follow the same theme. So the problem with viewing the keywords like this is there's so many different themes within them. We have Lulu Lemon yoga mat, which if you didn't know, Lulu Lemon is actually a brand that makes yoga mats. We've got Amazon. We've got Walmart. We've got kids' yoga mat. We've got yoga mat cleaners. All the keyword ideas we're seeing right now, they're all very random and they're not really grouped together. Now, when it comes to keyword research and what we call on-page SEO, which is what I'm going to show you later on in the course, typically when you have a page on your website such as this one right here, travel yoga mats, on this one page, which is about travel yoga mats, you want to have all the keywords which are relevant to travel yoga mats.

So as you can imagine, if we go ahead and download all these 492 keywords, going through all of this data to find the relevant keywords for this particular page is going to take us quite some time. SEMRush has actually done a lot of the hard work for us, and what it's simply done is it's categorized all these keywords by themes already. The way you can view what these themes are is by looking on the left-hand side of the screen. So as you can see, we have a theme for best. We have cleaning. We've got Lulu Lemon, so if I go ahead and give that a click, it's going to sift through all the keywords and show me literally the keywords which just reference Lulu Lemon. So I've got Lulu Lemon yoga mat. How to clean Lulu Lemon yoga mat. Lulu Lemon yoga mat bag. Is quite a tongue twister, Lulu Lemon. If we keep on scrolling down, we've got travel. So we go ahead and give travel a click.

This is now going to show us all the keywords related to travel, travel yoga mat, best travel yoga mat, foldable yoga mat for travel. As you can see, it's going to make your life so much easier when it comes to organizing your keywords.

What we typically do is, we pick one of the themes on the left, so let's go for towel. Of course, you need to pick a theme which is actually relevant to your website. For the purpose of this video, let's just imagine you don't have any LuluLemon yoga mats for sale on your website, then you obviously wouldn't download those keywords as it's not really relevant to your website.

Let's go for a towel. We've clicked the towel, we've got 10 different keywords. Now what we want to do is click export. Make sure we have this group selected, as this is just going to download keywords all within this keyword theme, and then simply click your file format. I'm going to go for Excel. Give that a click. It's now going to download all those keywords, and I'll show you exactly what it looks like once you open the file.

Once you open the file, it's going to look like this. You get a few columns in total. However, for the purpose of this process, as it's just keyword research, the only two columns we're going to need is going to be column A and column B, which is the keyword and the volume. Let's go ahead and copy these keywords, and get it over across to our keyword research template. Again, like I said, this is where we add all the keywords that we find, and we add it all to one spreadsheet so it becomes nice and easy to manage.

As we've downloaded the keywords for the towel theme, it doesn't make any sense to add it on the master tab. What you want to do is add the keywords for a theme on a different tab. Let's go ahead and pick page one, and I'm simply going to the paste all the keywords here, like so. Now I know page one is all to do with the theme towel. I'm simply going to rename this page from page one, and I'm simply going to put in the theme name, which is towel.

Now I have all of my keywords which are related to yoga mat towels on one tab, very nice and clean. Let's go ahead and do another keyword theme. Let's go for a trip. We have eight keywords for travel yoga mats. Exactly the same thing. We'll click export, this group, and then I'll go for Excel. Download that file, and then open it. And then do exactly the same thing. Copy the first two columns, the keyword and the volume. And let's get over to our keyword research template.

I'm going to go for page two for this one, control V to paste them all across, and I'm going to rename page two to the theme we've just downloaded, which is going to be travel.

As you can see already, we've got two keyword themes on our keyword research template. We've got travel and we've got towels. Having everything on one sheet makes your life so much easier than having multiple spreadsheets like this with all this really weird information on which you don't actually need.

Essentially, what you want to do is rinse and repeat this and do it for as many themes as you see relevant to the website that you are working on. Once you've done that, you're going to have a keyword research template, which has all of your keyword ideas on, and they're going to be categorized by the type of product or the type of service you offer. It's going to make her life so much more easier, and really allow you to take your SEO skills to the next level.

It's good to note as well, that the process we just carried out was just for the keyword yoga mats. You can actually rinse and repeat this process, and use other different products and services that you actually offer. For example, I can go back to this example website, and we can do the same search for yoga belts, we can go for yoga kits, and then literally get all of our keyword ideas, see what themes we have, and do the process over and over again, till we literally have thousands and thousands of keyword ideas.

This process is super, super powerful, and will literally ensure you find every single keyword that is possible for your specific industry.

Section 4: How To Find All The Keywords Your Competitors Rank For:

In this video, I'm going to show you how we can reverse engineer the competition to see all of the keywords our competitors are targeting. This is a really effective method to do keyword research as essentially the websites you are competing with, so the ones already on page one of Google, they would have done all the hard work and all the heavy lifting already. So all we need to do is look at all the keywords they're targeting and then simply cherry-pick the ones which are relevant to our website.

So to do this, we'll be using our clever tool, which is called SEMrush. So firstly, we need to figure out who our competitors are, which is very easy to do as all we need to do is simply go over to Google and search for a keyword which we'd like to target. So for the purpose of this video, I'm going to go for a travel yoga mat and then carry out a search like so. And then what I want to do is scroll down to the organic section, so not the ads at the top; I want to be looking at the websites ranking organically. So in position one, we have amazon.co.uk. And then, what I'm going to do is right-click this one and then click the copy link address and then go back to our tool, SEMrush, simply paste in that URL right here so control+V and then simply carry out a search for that.

Now, what SEMrush is going to do, it's going to return tons of data, all about this URL, including all the keywords that this page appears for in Google. So once the page is loaded, you want to scroll down to where it says organic research and then under that look at top organic keywords. So these are all the keywords that this specific page, which was an Amazon page appears for in Google. So let's go ahead and click the view detail to look at all of those 17 keywords.

And just like that, we can now see all 17 keywords: best travel yoga mat, finished yoga mat, foldable yoga mat, best travel yoga mat Australia, which is a quite interesting keyword. So what I like to do from here is simply export all of these keywords and get them added to our keyword research template. Now, as there are only 17 keywords, we actually don't need to go ahead and add any filters. So you can obviously add filters and tell SEMrush to only show you the keywords that have a specific amount of monthly searches. However, as it's only 17, it's very easy to manage. So I'm not going to go ahead and do that. I'm simply going to go ahead and explore all of these keywords.

So let's go ahead and click export, make sure we have all selected and then go for Excel. So once you open the spreadsheet, it's going to look something pretty similar to this. Again, SEMrush gives you a lot of information in a spreadsheet. However, we only need two of the columns, which is going to be column A, which is the actual keyword we are looking at and it's going to be column D, which is a monthly search volume. So let's go ahead and delete all these other columns as they are not relevant, like, so. We'll delete position; we do not need that one, and we'll delete the position or previous position, we don't need that either. So now we've got our keyword and we've got our monthly search volume. So these are all keywords to do with travel yoga mats. So what we are going to do is simply copy all of these keywords and the search volume and go over to our keyword research template, make sure we were on our travel tab and then simply paste in these keywords.

Now, as you can see, initially, we had eight different keywords and we've now added another, was it 17? 17 different keywords. So it just goes to show that you do not want to be using just one method for keyword research to find all of the keywords that are relevant to your website and your industry. You need to be using multiple keyword research processes just like I'm showing you in this course. So let's actually go back to Google and take another website from page one and rinse and repeat the process. So we've done Amazon already, which is the top of Google organically. In position two, we have Yogamatters, which is actually the website we are using for the example of this training video. So we're going to go ahead to position three for soulsalute.com. The same thing as before, right-click the copy link address, go over to SEMrush, and then simply replace that URL, enter the new URL and then click search. And then SEMrush is going to return tons of data, all about this URL, such as the keywords.

So, as you can see, this URL actually appears for 618 keywords in Google, which is a lot of keywords indeed. So the reason why this URL appears for a lot more keywords than the other URL is that if we look at the URL, which is actually appearing in Google, we can see that this URL is actually a blog and it's a blog on the guide to choosing the best travel yoga mat. So this is why we're going to see so many more keywords than we did for the first URL, as the one by Amazon was literally just a page selling travel yoga mats. So it won't be that many words or that much content on that page. So as a result, it won't be appearing for that many keywords.

So let's go back to SEMrush and look at all of these keywords we found. Remember, we searched for travel yoga mats; however, as this is a URL, which is just going over a blog and the guide to travel yoga mats, we're going to get a lot of irrelevant keywords in this research. We have yoga mat, which has no relevance to travel yoga mat. We've got manduka eco superlite versus jade voyager. Again, no relevance whatsoever. Can you fold a yoga mat? Quite interesting. We've got quality yoga mats; again, nothing to do with travel.

So as these keywords are pretty much randomized and they don't follow any consistent theme, what we want to do is go over to our keyword research template and actually add all of these keywords to our master tab and then go through the filters and apply the keyword to the right theme. So let's go ahead and do that now. Let's go to the top of SEMrush, click export and then go for Excel, download all the keywords like so, and let's open that spreadsheet.

So once you open the spreadsheet, it's going to look like this. And it's the same process as before; we only want to be looking at the keyword and the search volume, which is column A and column D. So all the other columns can simply be deleted. So let's go ahead and delete all these columns now. So say column E onwards and we'll delete column B. We do not need column C either so we'll go for column C, and they both can be deleted. And now we have our keyword and our search volume. So let's go ahead and copy all of these keywords over to our keyword research template.

So I believe that is all the keywords. So I'm going to do a control+C go over to my keyword research template, ensure I am on the master tab, and then simply paste in all of these keywords like so.

So once I've added the keywords over to my master tab, what I want to do is go and filter through these keywords and see if I can find any keywords that have any of these themes. So I've got a towel and I've got to travel. So as we just carried out a search for the keyword of travel yoga mats, I'm going to make that my first theme.

So all I want to do is simply go to this drop-down arrow right here under the word keyword. And what I want to do is, where it says choose one, I want to go for contains and simply put in the word "travel." Now what this is going to do, it's going to show me all of the keywords that contain the word travel; i.e. the keywords which are relevant to the travel theme.

So you can see these keywords have actually gone down from 700 to 74. It's actually going to be 73 as it's including the top one up here, which is just the name of the column. So what we're going to do is take all of these keywords and then copy them across to our travel theme like so.

So now on our travel theme page, we have 99, obviously minus the top one, so 98 keywords in total. When we initially started this, I think we had about eight different keywords. So it just goes to show just exactly how powerful these strategies are.

Now, do bear in mind, we're going to have a lot of duplicate keywords in these columns, but don't worry about that for now, as in a separate video in this section of the course, I'm going to show you exactly how we can organize our keyword research template to ensure we have no duplicates and to ensure it's nice, tidy and organized before we move on to the next section of the course.

Now, it's good to note that we can also go back to our master tab and instead of searching for the theme of travel, which is the one we've just done, we can see if we have any keywords for the theme towel.

So let's go back to our filter, give it a click and replace the word "travel" with our other theme, which is towel, and let's see what that returns to us. You can see, we now have more keywords. We've got 32, again, minus the top column, so 31 different keywords all to do with the theme of yoga towels. So it's exactly the same process. Take all these keywords, control+C, go over to the relevant theme tab and then simply paste them in, like so.

Now, do bear in mind as well that all these keywords we're looking at now are just for one website. You can literally rinse and repeat this for every website you see on page one. And believe me, by the time you finish, you're going to have thousands and thousands of keywords. And remember, when it comes to SEO, the more data and the more information you have, the better decisions you'll be able to make, which is going to make you overall, a much better SEO.

And of course, what I'm showing you in this video is just for one keyword, "travel yoga mat." You can obviously carry out another search for another one of your keywords, such as just, maybe, yoga mat or maybe even yoga brick. You can literally rinse and repeat this and look at all the websites multiple, multiple times to ensure you have the most comprehensive lists out there.

This is a really powerful strategy. I hope you enjoy it. And I'll see you in the next video.

Section 4:How To Use Google Auto-suggest To Come Up With Keyword Ideas:

When it comes to finding keywords for your website, one method you can utilize, which is completely free, is Google autosuggest. So you've probably seen this before. You've gone onto Google and you've typed in something like a cake, because we all love cake, and you can see Google is suggesting other keywords, which is related to what you typed in.

So in my example, I've typed in the word cake and Google is suggesting these other keywords, such as cake recipe, cake box, cake stand, delivery, mix, bakes, tins, pops, and even in a mug. So these are all keywords, which Google deems relevant to what I've typed in.

So you can actually use this to find tons of keyword ideas for your website. So if I follow suit with my yoga example and type in yoga, you can see I've got yoga mat, I've got yoga poses, yoga for beginners, yoga near me, yoga pants, which could be a really good one and it's one I didn't initially think of.

But the key to getting this right is to make sure you type in your keywords slowly. So you don't want to go into Google and just type in yoga mat, for example. You literally want to do it letter by letter. So yoga M for mat. We've got a yoga mat, yoga matters, yoga music, which is another good one. We've got a yoga mat bag.

Let's type in an A, and we can see we've got yoga mat eBay, yoga mat Tesco. So let's type in a T on the word mat. Yoga bag again, you've got yoga mat again at the top, yoga mats UK. Let's just type in yoga mat and do a search for that.

What's really good to note as well, if you scroll to the bottom of the page, you're going to see this section right here, searches related to yoga mat. So these are additional keywords, which, again, Google deems relevant to what you search for.

So I've got Sainsbury's yoga mats, I've got yoga mat Primark, which is a shop here in the United Kingdom. I've got yoga mat Sports Direct, again, which is another shop in the United Kingdom. But we can actually go over to Google and type in a different keyword, yoga mat bags. Again, scroll down to the bottom, the search is related to yoga mat bags. We can see we have other keywords, yoga kit bag, which is one that didn't come up in the first instance. We also have gym bag with yoga mat holder, which is a really specific keyword. But, essentially, you can rinse and repeat this method to find tons of new keyword ideas for your website.

You can actually use this tool as well, which is completely free. It's called keywordtool.io. Essentially, it uses Google's autocomplete feature. So if I go over to the search bar and simply type in a yoga mat, pick my country, which I'll leave as the United States for now, and then click search, what this tool is going to do is going to list out all of the keywords, which are relevant to the keyword you just searched for.

So you can see I've got yoga mat Amazon, I've got yoga mats near me, yoga mat and blocks, yoga mat alternative, which is a really good one. We've got yoga mat Adidas, yoga mat studio, tons and tons of keywords.

As you can see, we can scroll down, we've got up to five different pages. The information on the right, which is normally going to be the search volume, I'll just show you, is going to be blurred out as it is a free tool. You can obviously upgrade and go for the pro tool, but you don't actually need to do it.

The keywords you're seeing right here are the keywords which Google deems relevant and are keywords that people have typed into Google. So we know these keywords actually have some monthly search volume behind it, but essentially this is a method you can utilize to find tons and tons of keywords that you can target for your website.

Section 4:The Importance Of Keeping Your Keywords Organised:

Now we finished the keyword research process, it's a good idea to go through our spreadsheet and remove any irrelevant or duplicate keywords.

As I'm not sure about you, but when it comes to keyword research, I get super, super excited. I come across a great keyword and I'm, like, yep, let's chuck it down on the spreadsheet. I'll come across some more keywords, they will get added. It goes on and on and on. Before I know it, I've got tons and tons of keywords on my spreadsheet, which, as you can imagine, makes your life a little bit harder when it comes to reviewing all the data, as the more keywords you have, the more data you have to review, right? So it's always best practice to just clean up your spreadsheet and make sure that all the keywords you have on it are, indeed, relevant to your website.

For example, without even scrolling, I can see an irrelevant keyword right here on Row 27, travel yoga mat, Amazon. Now the search intent behind this keyword, obviously, relates to Amazon. If someone types in a travel yoga mat, Amazon, then they are looking for a travel yoga mat, which is sold on Amazon. As we are not Amazon, then this is not really a good keyword to have on our spreadsheet, as it's not relevant to our website.

Let's go ahead and see if we have any other keywords, which referenced the word Amazon. To do that, it's very easy. Just go over to our filters, again change that to Contains and simply enter the word Amazon. As you can see, we have a few more occurrences of keywords that mentioned the word Amazon, so all I'm going to do is simply delete these from our spreadsheet as, as I said, these are not relevant. Let's go back and clear that filter and that should've removed all the keywords, which mentioned Amazon. You can see it's done because we have clear gaps in our rows, so just a blank row with a keyword was initially. So that's really good.

Again, it's kind of the same process. You just go for your keywords, see which ones are relevant and which ones are not relevant, and simply get those removed from your spreadsheet.

Now, when it comes to removing duplicates, the thing I like to do is go to the top of the spreadsheet, make sure you go to data and then filter by A to Z. What it is going to do is show you all the keywords in alphabetical order. Any time you see a duplicate keyword, you simply just remove it from your spreadsheet.

For example, I can see a duplicate on Row 26 and on Row 27, anti-slip yoga mat towel. Let's go ahead and delete one of those as a duplicate. Let's scroll down and see if we can find any more. These two look pretty similar, but a little bit different. We've got two cheap yoga mats. So, again, let's delete one of these and, hopefully, get the idea here. You just go through all of your keywords and remove all of the duplicates.

Now this applies to your Theme tabs as well. So where we have towels, you can see we've got tons of keywords, it would be exactly the same thing, filter by A to Z, remove any duplicates that you have. We've got the best yoga mat towel here, and we've got it here again. Of course, we need to remove one of them, so it's no longer a duplicate.

Go through the same thing for all of your tabs and, of course, check the tabs as well to see if you have any relevant keywords such as Amazon, maybe a keyword like this, Australia. Maybe you're not targeting Australia. Maybe you're based in the United States and you only serve the United States. If that is the case, then this is, obviously, going to be an irrelevant keyword.

This is really important to do. Please make sure you take quite a bit of time going through your keywords, as it's going to make your life so much more easier when it comes to doing the on-page SEO, which we're going to cover later on in the course.

Section 4: How To Validate Your Keywords Using Google Trends:

In this video, I'm going to show you how we can use Google Trends to verify if your keywords are rising in popularity or if they're declining in popularity. Google Trends is a free online tool by Google. Just simply go over to Google, and type in Google Trends, and you'll find it in the number one position. Essentially what we're going to do here is go back to our keyword research template and pick one of our keywords, any keyword at random such as men yoga clothes for example. Then go back to Google Trends, paste in our keyword and ensure we have the right country selected. For me, I'm going to go to United Kingdom just for the purpose of this video. However, do pick the country which is suitable for you. Once you have the country selected, go back to the box, and then click enter.

That will now give you tons of data about this keyword. You can see the data for the last 12 months seems to be up and down quite all over the place. Depending on what keywords you're targeting, it's always advised to go for a longer duration. You can do that by going up to here, and instead of looking at the past 12 months of data, you can look at it from 2004 to the present. Let's have a look at that now. As you can see, men's yoga clothes are pretty stagnant, quite a lot of jumps back in 2004, I'm not sure what happened in 2004. However, the overall trend seems to be grown as you can see from here. That's actually a good keyword.

If we go back to our keyword research template and look at another keyword, maybe let's just go for yoga clothes, and let's search for that. Let's have a look at this trend. As you can see, the trend for yoga clothes is really, really growing. It's been growing since 2000- I would say, 2008. Ever since 2008, in December to be precise, yoga clothes have seen a massive increase in popularity. And as a result, the trend is going upwards.

So if you type in your keywords and you see a massive trend that is going downhill, then it is something to worry about. It's not the end of the world as some keywords can obviously decline and then come back. To be honest, if you look at the trend from 2004 to 2008, it does like yoga clothes actually going downhill, however now, is on the uprise. So this is actually a really good tool you can use just to analyze your keywords and a little bit more detail and just find out the overall trend and the popularity of the keywords you want to target as the worst thing you're going to do is build a website, optimize it for a keyword that is actually declining in popularity.

You can also scroll down the page as well and get a bit more information such as interest by sub-region, interest by countries. You can get more related queries down here as well, such as yoga clothes for women. We can give that a click. It will load a new page and give us more information and data as well. So the yoga clothes for women keywords seems to be a little bit more, I would say, levelled out, doesn't seem to be rising, to be honest with you which shows you straight away and tells you that yoga clothes for women have always been quite consistent in popularity. However, with the men's closing keyword, it seems to be gaining in popularity recently which could be just for more men getting into yoga these days, and as a result, they now require yoga clothes, which explains the increase in popularity for men's yoga clothes. So hopefully you found that useful, and you can use Google trends to validate a lot of the keywords you want to target.
