Creating Content For Your Website - Word Track
To help aid your own study material, here is the word track for the whole Creating Content For Your Website section of the course.

Section 5: Overview:

Creating content for your website. In this section, I'm going to cover the importance of content in SEO, I'm going to show you how I can come up with tons of content ideas for your website, I'm actually going to show you a few different strategies you can utilize, and I'm going to show you what you should avoid when creating content for your website as well. And lastly, I'm going to cover the importance of fresh content. So this is uploading fresh content to your websites, such as a new blog post, and so on and so on. So let's hop into this section.

Section 5: The Importance Of Content In SEO:

Whenever you're crafting some content for your website, always ask yourself, what value does this content provider to the user? Google's main goal is to provide useful and relevant results to the user. As a result, Google's algorithm analyzes millions of search results and it returns the website which it believes answers the query the best.

For example, if someone searches for wireless headphones, Google is going to return websites that all talk about wireless headphones, or that sell wireless headphones on them. As you can imagine, there's going to be quite a few websites all talking about wireless headphones. However, if your website is one of the few websites that has extremely high content on it, such as no spelling errors, perfect grammar, your content is formatted correctly, then it's more likely that Google will return your site to the user, which is, aka, high rankings.

However, if your content is subpar, Google will not return your site to the user, which results in low rankings. So you really need high quality content to stand out. Now we understand the basics of content and just how important content is, in the next video, I'm going to show you how you can come up with tons of content ideas for your website.

Section 5: Content Generation Ideas - Review The Competition:

A great method you can utilize to come up with tons of new content ideas for your website is to review your competitors and see what they are writing about. This is a very simple but yet powerful method as your competitors will already have done the heavy lifting for you. They would have done all the keyword research to find new keyword topics, things you can write about. You simply have to go over to the website, see what they wrote about, and simply cherry pick which ones you want to write about on your website.

So if we put the yoga mat keywords to the side now and focus on another keyword such as wireless headphones, I'll show you exactly how we can find tons of content ideas for this keyword. The first thing I need to do is find some websites I'm competing with, which is pretty straightforward. Just go over to Google, enter your keyword, and the websites you see on page one are essentially the websites you're competing with. I've typed in wireless headphones. You've got some ads at the top of the page, so let's scroll down. See, we've got Currys up there, we've got TechRadar, we've got What Hi-Fi? I've already opened up these two websites in another tab, so let's just refresh.

I've typed in wireless headphones. I'm now going over to our competitors' websites to see what they are writing about. So if I go on TechRadar, I actually went over to the search menu at the top and I simply just typed in headphones. As you can see here, search results for headphones. So if we scroll down, we can see we have tons of different articles we can write about. We have the best noise canceling headphones, we have the best over ear headphones, best cheap headphones, your guide to the best budget headphones, tons and tons of ideas. You've got the best headphones 2020, tons and tons of ideas. So as you can see, within a couple of seconds I already have potentially four or five different articles I can all write about.

It's even better if we look at another website. Let's look at What Hi-Fi? has to offer. Again, I've simply gone into the website, I've clicked search and I've typed in headphones, as you can see here. Search results for headphones. I've got the best AKG headphones, I've got best headphones on Amazon, best B&O headphones, best headphones for running, which is actually a really good keyword, best wireless headphones. You've got the best sports headphones, so tons and tons of ideas.

So instead of trying to reinvent the wheel when sitting there and brainstorming for hours and hours, just checking out what your competitors are doing is actually a really smart and efficient way to find tons of ideas you can write about for your website. In the next video, I'm going to show you another strategy you can utilize to find tons of content ideas for your website. I'll see you there.

Section 5: Content Generation Ideas - SEMRush:

Another strategy you can utilize to come up with content ideas is to use question-related keywords. So, whatever industry you operate in, whether that's yoga mats, professional services, e-commerce, and so on, there are going to be tons of question-related searches, which are all relevant to the product or services you offer. By using SEMrush we can find out very easily exactly what these question-related searches are. So, to give you a better idea of what I mean, let's look at a live example of this. So, let's go over to SEMrush and search for one of our broad keywords. So, I'll go for yoga mats and then click search. And once information has loaded, we want to scroll down and look at the second box for keyword variations. If we look to the right-hand side of keyword variations, we're going to have tons of keywords, which are all related to questions.

So, these are all keywords, which are related to what you searched for, which for me was yoga mat. So, some of the keyword questions we have are, how to clean yoga mat, how to clean Lululemon yoga mat, how to wash yoga mats, where to buy yoga mats, and so on and so on. So, these are all keyword searches, which are related to questions. And the great thing about these keywords is that they all have their own monthly search volume. In total, there's over 3000 different keyword questions we can use for the one keyword example I searched for, which was yoga mats.

So, let's go ahead and look at all of these keywords in a bit more detail. And as you can see, we have tons and tons of ideas. How long is a yoga mat? What is the best fitness for a yoga mat, what to use instead of a yoga mat, and so on and so on. So, if we take one of these keywords and actually Google it, so how long is a yoga mat? Let's have a look at what Google shows us, 68 inches long. Great. Let's keep on scrolling down. You can see the website in position one is, what size yoga mat do I need? Let's discuss your options. So, if we open this website and have a look at this type of content, you can see, this is literally a blog post on this website, talking about what size yoga mat do they need? Let's discuss your options. You scroll down through the content and we have the standard size for yoga mats. We have different lengths of various heights.

So, hopefully you can see what I'm doing here. We can literally use all of these keyword ideas to come up with tons of new content ideas for our website. And the great thing about using these keywords is that because they have their own monthly search volume. If we can rank these keywords on page one, like this website has right here, we can actually start to generate some additional traffic, and then even filter that traffic through to our main pages, which actually make us money.

So, the ones that may sell yoga mats. So, let's actually go back to this website and see if they are indeed doing that, which it looks like they are, buying your first yoga mat. If you check the URL in the bottom left-hand side of the screen, one down here, which is just gone now, if you check it one more time, you can see it says best yoga mats. It's changing a little bit now because the page is still loading, but essentially you can see this article does indeed filter the traffic through to another page on their website. So, this is a really simple, but effective method you can use to come up with tons and tons of content generation ideas. I'll see you in the next video.

Section 5: Content Generation Ideas - Industry Related Blogs:

Another great method you can utilize to come up with tons of content ideas for your website is to subscribe to industry related blogs. So this is a very good way as essential when you subscribe to an industry related blog, you're going to get an email every single day, maybe once a week, once a month. It all depends on your frequency, but these emails are going to contain tons of content ideas you can then use for your website. Finding these industry related blogs is actually very, very simple, so let's imagine you're in gaming industry and you write about maybe gaming headphones, gaming chairs. You simply want to go over to Google and just type in the best 100 gaming blogs. You're going to come across a website called feedspot.com, simply give that an open and you'll see it'll literally list out the top 100 video game blogs out there.

You can actually scroll through them, putting your email and subscribe all from one page. It's very, very handy and it makes the process very, very easy for you. You can also do this for multiple other industries as well. It's not just gaming, it literally applies to any industry out there. For example, if you're in the fitness industry, just go back to Google and change your keyword for best 100 gaming blogs, two best 100 fitness blogs, and as you see, we've got blog.feedspot in number one. Give that a click. And again, you're going to see 100 fitness blogs that you can subscribe to and get tons of content ideas. A lot of people do like this idea as it's pretty hands off, you can literally just put your email address in, sit back and you're going to get an email every now and then giving you content ideas with minimal effort. So it all comes down to preference really, and picking the strategy which you think is most suited for you. I'll see you in the next video.

Section 5: What To Avoid When Creating Content:

One thing you want to be wary of when you're producing content for your website is you want to avoid having a massive wall of text, the reason being, as you'll see from this example below, we have the image on the left, which is just copied and paste all of the text. As a result, it's a massive wall of texts. An example of the right, they've actually taken the text and they've added a heading there and now a subheading. They formatted it, they've added some bullet points. You've got another heading, they've got an image, the image at the top. So you can see it's so much easier to view on the eye, and as a result, if I were to land on both of these websites, I am way much more likely to read the website on the right. If I actually landed on this example on the left, what I would do, I would actually go back to Google and find a different website because there's no way I would sit through here and read all of this.

Even though it's the same or information on example on the right, just visually it looks way more intimidating and tedious to read. So it's very important to get this right because it's actually a metric Google uses in the algorithm. It's called dwell time. So essentially the longer that person spends on your website is actually a good indication to Google that what you have in your website is good. So if you have a good dwell time number, what actually happens is Google puts your site higher up in Google. However, if you have a low dwell time, so people come on your site, and they're bouncing straight back to Google, and they're not spending a lot of time on that page, what happens it's a clear signal to Google that, hey, this site isn't actually satisfying the user, which obviously Google's algorithm is all about giving the user what they want to see. It's a sign to Google it's not good. So as a result, it will put your site further back on Google, so page two, three, four, and even further, depending how bad dwell time is.

So make sure you put a lot of effort into formatting your content correctly, getting the structure done, bullet points, images, and just make it engaging for someone to read.

Section 5: The Importance Of Fresh Content in SEO:

Google's job is to serve up the best search results for people who are looking for information. Google wants the content that it serves up to be fresh and up to date, and that is typically the best type of content out there. There's actually a fresh content algorithm and by adding it to your site you can take advantage of it. I've tested it multiple times and what I'm about to share is what I call the bare minimum. At least once per month, you need to increase the size of your website by at least one page. You can easily do this by adding a new blog post to your site once a month for example. And by adding a new blog post to your site once a month, you are clearly demonstrating to Google that you care about your website whilst also satisfying the fresh content algorithm.

One of the worst things you can do is create a website and then neglect it. This is actually what so many people do and plays a big factor in why so many people do not succeed online. We want to avoid neglecting our sites and by publishing at least one piece of content a month, we're going in the right direction. Coming up with tons of blog ideas you can publish every month is really, really easy. As you would have sought already from my last few videos in this section of the course. You can also consider updating existing content once a month as well, as this is also a clear signal to Google that once again you care about your content and out of your competition, your content is the most freshest and up to date, which is a win-win.

And just to clarify as well, when I say updating existing content, what I'm referring to is things such as adding a new sentence, removing a sentence, changing a picture, adding a video for example. This is more than enough and as I've already said, I've tested this multiple times already and I haven't seen any additional benefit of adding maybe a whole paragraph or two paragraphs for example. As long as you're updating your content and satisfying the fresh content segment or the algorithm you're making Google happy. You're also letting Google know that your content is the freshest and the most up to date out there.

Section 5: How long should your content be:

I get asked this question quite often. Some people seem to think all content should be 500 words, some think 1,000, some even think 5,000 words. However, my response is always the same. Don't guess. Instead of guessing, base it on what we know is already working. And what I mean by that is, if we look at page one for the keywords you want to target. Look at the website already on page one and see how many words they're using. That is a much better way to go about it.

I actually have a two-step process for this. Step one is to work out the average of the top three websites. And then step two is plus 10% contingency, just so we know we're there or about. This works really, really well for me and has never let me down. Essentially what we're doing here, is we're mimicking what is already working. If the top three websites on page one roughly have 1,500 words. Then you want to follow suit and also have 1,500 words. However, adding another 10% just ensures you're better than them. However, don't just add another 10% of words for the sake of it. You need to make sure your content is actually worth it and provides value.

So instead of just giving you this information, I always like to go one step further. So we're going to head over to Google now and I'm going to show you exactly how this works with a live walkthrough. So let's imagine the keyword you want to be on page one for is, do you need a yoga mat? What I'd simply do is go over to Google and Google that keyword. So, do you need a yoga mat? Then I'll take the top three websites in position one, which I've already done. So I've got Yoga International, Exercise.co.uk and Livestrong.

So I've opened all of the websites in a new tab, you can see here already. And simply what I would do, I would get another tab open for this website called wordcounter.net. And I'll simply go on each website and copy all the words and then paste it on the word counter. So let's do that right now. So copy this and then paste that into the word counter. So that's the first website done, that can go. Second website. Let's copy all of the content. Seems a little bit longer than the first one, let's copy that. And we'll paste that into the word counter, right at the bottom as well. Now we're done with the second website. Let's look at the third website. Let's copy all of this content. Oh, I'm not sure what happened there. Let's take all that down. Seems to be a lot. Like so, it seems to be pretty equivalent to be honest with you. We'll paste that in there.

Scroll to the top. And as you can see, we have 2,905 words across three different websites. So simply what I would do, I would go to an online calculator. Type in 2905, 2095. Divide that by three as we checked three websites. That would give me an average of 968 words. So again, that is the average. What I recommend you actually add another 10% so that would be … it's literally another 96, so plus 96. Which gives us a total of 1064 words. Again, you don't need to work exactly to 1064. But if this was me creating the content, then I would make sure my content is around the 1000 wordmark. In that way I know I'm going to fit in with what the other websites on page one are doing.
